> "I I I .  Covariate Data Construction SEDA 4.0 contains CCD and ACS data that have been curated for use with the school, geographic school district, county, metropolitan area, and state achievement data. SEDA 4.0 differs from the prior version of SEDA in that it uses the new crosswalk files to aggregate the covariates to geographic school districts and counties, releases state-level covariate data and adds data for the 2016-2017 and 2017-2018 school years." ([Manson, Steven et al 2019:40](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/Q5HJYYT3?page=40))

> "I I I . A.  ACS Data and SES Composite Construction For districts, counties, metropolitan areas and states we use data from the ACS to construct measures of median family income, proportion of adults with a bachelor's degree or higher, proportion of adults that are unemployed, the household poverty rate, the proportion of households receiving SNAP benefits, and the proportion of households with children that are headed by a single mother. We also combine these measures to construct a single socioeconomic status composite." ([Manson, Steven et al 2019:40](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/Q5HJYYT3?page=40))

> "ACS data are available as 5-year pooled samples, from which we use samples from 2005- 2009 through 2014-2018.  The samples we use here reflect data for the total population of residents in each unit. In select years, district-level tabulations are also available for families who live in each school district in the U.S and who have children enrolled in public school. However, the most recent sample of this data that has all of the information we need is the 5-year 2007- 2011 sample. We prefer to use the total population tabulation data from more recent years. We have compared measures constructed using the total population samples and the relevant children enrolled in public schools samples in years where both samples are available and the measures are highly correlated (r > 0.99) and not sensitive to which sample we use." ([Manson, Steven et al 2019:40](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/Q5HJYYT3?page=40))

> "The construction of our derived measures from the ACS data occurs in a variety of steps, which we describe below. Our derivation of these measures is complicated by the fact that we use the ACS-reported margins of error to compute empirical Bayes shrunken versions of our key ACS measures. The shrunken measures help account for attenuation bias that results from the fact that smaller units' measures include more measurement error due to smaller sample sizes. Appendix B2 describes the problems of measurement error and attenuation bias in detail." ([Manson, Steven et al 2019:40](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/Q5HJYYT3?page=40))

> "Below" ([Manson, Steven et al 2019:40](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/Q5HJYYT3?page=40))

> "we describe the steps we take to create our derived measures from the raw ACS data. Note that we do not compute standard errors or empirical Bayes shrunken versions of state-level measures. State samples are sufficiently large as to not be concerned about measurement error due to small samples. Therefore, many of the steps described below only refer to district, county, and metropolitan area data." ([Manson, Steven et al 2019:41](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/Q5HJYYT3?page=41))

> "Step 1: We download and clean the raw ACS data for each year and unit, saving the measures of interest along with their margins of error. We use data from the 2005-2009, 2006- 2010, 2007-2011, 2008-2012, 2009-2013, 2010-2014, 2011-2015, 2012-2016, 2013-2017, and 2014-2018 samples. In Appendix B1 we provide a list of the raw ACS data tables we downloaded and use to compute each derived measure." ([Manson, Steven et al 2019:41](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/Q5HJYYT3?page=41))

> "Step 2: Some of our derived measures require combining various fields from ACS in order to compute our desired metric. For example, in order to compute the proportion of adults with a bachelor's degree or higher we sum the number of men with a bachelor's degree, a master's degree or a professional degree with the number of women with a bachelor's degree, a master's degree or a professional degree and divide that sum by the total number of adults in the unit. Each of these component measures is reported with its own margin of error in the raw ACS data. We use the margins of error from each component measure to generate a single standard error for the combined bachelor's degree attainment rate variable (and do the same for all 6 socioeconomic measures that make up the SES composite).  Appendix B3 describes our methodology for computing the sampling variance of sums of ACS variables in detail." ([Manson, Steven et al 2019:41](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/Q5HJYYT3?page=41))

> "Step 3: After constructing the 6 SES measures and their standard errors we impute some missing data using Stata's -mi impute chainedroutine, which fills in missing values iteratively by using chained equations. We reshape the data from long (one observation for each unit and race group [all, White, Black and Hispanic] in each year) to wide (one observation for each unit and a separate variable for each of the 6 SES by race measures in each year)." ([Manson, Steven et al 2019:41](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/Q5HJYYT3?page=41))

> "We use both the 6 SES measures and their standard errors in the imputation model as well as the total population count in each unit. The imputation model, therefore, includes median income, proportion of adults with a bachelor's degree or higher, child poverty rate, SNAP receipt rate, single mother headed household rate, and unemployment rate for each race group (all, White, Black, Hispanic)" ([Manson, Steven et al 2019:41](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/Q5HJYYT3?page=41))

> "in each of 10-year spans for both the estimates and their standard errors. We estimate the imputation model 5 times" ([Manson, Steven et al 2019:42](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/Q5HJYYT3?page=42))

> "Step 4: Next, we use the imputed data to compute the SES composite. This is done 5 times for each imputed data set and then we take the average. This measure is computed as the first principal component score of the following measures (each standardized): median income, percent of adults ages 25 and older with a bachelor's degree or higher, child poverty rate, SNAP receipt rate, single mother headed household rate, and employment rate for adults ages 16-64. We use the logarithm of median income in these computations. We calculate the component loadings by conducting the analysis in 2008-2012 at the geographic school district level and weighting by geographic school district enrollment. We then use the loadings from this principal component analysis to calculate SES composite values for different subgroups, years and units. Note that only observations without any imputed ACS data are used in the computation of the factor weights" ([Manson, Steven et al 2019:42](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/Q5HJYYT3?page=42))

> "Table 15 shows the component loadings for the socioeconomic status composite as well as the mean and standard deviation of each measure it includes. The "standardized loadings" indicate the coefficients used to compute the overall geographic school district SES composite score from the 6 standardized indicator variables in 2008-2012, resulting in an SES composite that has an enrollment-weighted mean of 0 and standard deviation of 1 across all geographic school districts in 2008-2012 without any imputed data. The "unstandardized loadings" are rescaled versions of the coefficients that are used to construct an SES composite score from the raw (unstandardized) indicator variables, but which is on the same scale as the standardized SES composite scores" ([Manson, Steven et al 2019:42](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/Q5HJYYT3?page=42))

> "To provide context for interpreting values of the SES composite, Table 16 reports average values of the indicator variables at different values of the SES composite." ([Manson, Steven et al 2019:42](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/Q5HJYYT3?page=42))

> "Step 5: The next step is to construct a standard error of the SES composite. We discuss our methodology in detail in Appendix B4." ([Manson, Steven et al 2019:42](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/Q5HJYYT3?page=42))

> "Step 6: The final step is to do the empirical Bayes shrinking for the SES composites as well as for each of the 6 SES measures that go into making the composite. In addition to the timevarying versions of the SES composite, we also create an SES composite that is the average of" ([Manson, Steven et al 2019:42](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/Q5HJYYT3?page=42))

> "SES in the 2005-2009 and 2014-2018 ACS (i.e., using the first and last years' ACS samples). The shrinkage is done using a random effects meta-analysis regression model weighted by the standard error of each measure." ([Manson, Steven et al 2019:43](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/Q5HJYYT3?page=43))

> "I I I . B .  Common Core of Data Imputation School-level data from the CCD are available from Fall 1987 until Fall 2018. There is some missing data on racial composition and free/reduced price lunch receipt for some schools in some years. We therefore impute missing data on race/ethnicity and free/reduced priced lunch counts at the school level prior to aggregating data to the geographic school district, county, metropolitan area, or state level." ([Manson, Steven et al 2019:43](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/Q5HJYYT3?page=43))

> "The imputation model includes school-level data from the 1991-92 through 2018-19 school years and measures of total enrollment, enrollments by race (Black, Hispanic, White, Asian, and Native American), enrollments by free and reduced-priced lunch receipt (note that reduced-priced lunch is only available in 1998 and later), an indicator for whether the school is located in an urban area, and state fixed effects. To improve the imputation of free and reduced-priced lunch in more recent years we also use the proportion of students at each school that are classified as economically disadvantaged in the EDFacts data for 2008-09 through 2017-18 in the imputation model. Different states use different definitions of economically disadvantaged but these measures are highly correlated with free lunch rates from the CCD (r=.90). The imputations are estimated using predictive mean matching in Stata's -mi impute chainedroutine, which fills in missing values iteratively by using chained equations. The idea behind this method is to impute variables iteratively using a sequence of univariate imputation models, one for each imputation variable, with all variables except the one being included in the prediction equation on the right-hand side. This method is flexible for imputing data of different types. For more information, see: https://www.stata.com/manuals/mi.pdf" ([Manson, Steven et al 2019:43](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/Q5HJYYT3?page=43))

> "Prior to the imputation, we make three changes to the reported raw CCD data. First, for states with especially high levels of missing free and reduced-price lunch data in recent years, we searched state department of education websites for alternative sources of data. We were only able to locate the appropriate data for Oregon and Ohio. For these states we replace CCD counts of free and reduced-price lunch receipt with the counts reported in state department of" ([Manson, Steven et al 2019:43](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/Q5HJYYT3?page=43))

> "education data for 2008-09 through 2017-18. In Ohio, 8% of schools were missing CCD free lunch data in 4 or more of the EDFacts years. In Oregon, 5% of schools were missing CCD free lunch data in 4 or more of the EDFacts years. Other states with high rates of missing free lunch data in the CCD during the EDFacts years are Alaska, Arizona, Montana, Texas, and Idaho. Unfortunately, we were unable to locate alternative data sources for these states, and rely on the imputation model to fill in missing data." ([Manson, Steven et al 2019:44](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/Q5HJYYT3?page=44))

> "Second, starting in the 2011-12 school year some states began using community eligibility for the delivery of school meals whereby all students attending schools in low-income areas would have access to free meals regardless of their individual household income. Free lunch counts in schools in the community eligibility program are not reported in the same way nation-wide in the CCD. In community eligible schools, some schools report that all of their students are eligible for free lunch while others report counts that are presumably based on the individual student-level eligibility. Because reported free lunch eligible rates of 100 percent in community eligible schools may not accurately reflect the number of children from poor families in the school, we impute free lunch eligible rates in these schools. We replace free and reduced priced lunch counts as equal to missing if the school is a community eligible program school in a given year and their reported CCD free lunch rate is 100 percent. We then impute their free lunch eligible rate as described above." ([Manson, Steven et al 2019:44](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/Q5HJYYT3?page=44))

> "Third, and finally, prior to imputation we replaced free and reduced-price lunch counts as missing if the count was equal to 0. Anomalies in the CCD data led some cases to be reported as zeros when they should have been missing so we preferred to delete these 0 values and impute them using other years of data from that school." ([Manson, Steven et al 2019:44](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/Q5HJYYT3?page=44))

> "The structure of the data prior to imputation is wide - that is, there is one variable for each year for any given measure (i.e., total enrollment 1991, total enrollment 1992, total enrollment 1993, ..., total enrollment 2018) for all the measures described above. The exception are time invariant measures - urbanicity and state. We impute 6 datasets and use the average of the 6 imputed values for each school in each year. We then aggregate this imputed school by year data file to different geographic levels, computing our desired measures." ([Manson, Steven et al 2019:44](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/Q5HJYYT3?page=44))

#original